---
layout: post
title: "The Water Knife; a Review."
date: 2014-07-03 14:00:00
categories: Books
featured_image: /images/waterknife.jpg
---

Books about drought are hard for me to read. I was born in India, and my parents are still avidly connected to news and politics of the subcontinent. Perhaps you've read about the disturbing pattern of farmers in India comitting suicide, in part blaming the drought unable to tend their land. Or perhaps you haven't. You couldn't be blamed, not really, living as we do in a culture where agriculture and daily life are so abstracted. Farms for me personally evoke the hyper idyllic sounds constructed by nursery rhymes set to imagery of the land I drive through on my way to Disney World. And while I think of agriculture as a mostly solved problem, it isn't. And it probably will never be.

For me the word '*farm*' evokes sounds from nursery rhymes; images of the lush green landscape I speed through on my way to Disney World. Agriculture a concept so fundamental to the development of the human civilization is much more abstracted now. Perhaps you have heard of the sad pattern of farmers in India commiting suicide, their farms ravaged by drought and debt. Or closer to home: stories of water shortages in California.

## Activism via fiction

Bacigalupi clearly understands this. His first book **The Windup Girl** was about patented genes and the ethics of anyone being able to own and control something so fundamental as genetic code. Oh sure the story itself had a lot of neocolonialism, sexploitation and class discomfort aspects, but those were set up as a foil to expose how fundamentally wrong designer genes and their control is. Compared to other fictional books of ecological disaster, it is unabashedly activist. Touching the same nerve as Michael Pollan and Upton Sinclair, the author pleads the reader to look at the food on the plate and consider its genesis. In his second book, **The Water Knife**, Bacigalupi does something similar and more difficult. He asks the reader to consider what a society looks like without access to water.

I am not well read, or well traveled enough to tell you if the society he constructs is accurate. I can only tell you it feels accurate, with varying levels of success. A major drought has hit the western United States, and conditions are once again resemble the dust bowl of the 30's. The future despite its stylish augmented reality, electric cars, and smart computing isn't quite up to the task of battling the world going to hell. Reading through the book I get the feeling that perhaps it would be were it a singular disaster, but it isnt. Something like a super-Katrina has wiped out Texas, the Southeast is facing reality of becoming another atlantis, super storms and tornadoes are common occurenct to bees. Mass migrations have caused the political power to shift towards a libertarian philosophy, a general weakening of associative federalism. In this world we find a story where different interests fight, literally and metaphorically over extremely old senior water rights to the Colorado River. 

Water rights are boring by nature, one of those things that in my mind instantly evoke bureaucracy and paper shuffling. They aren't, not by a long shot. People fight over water. People die over water. The access to water especially water of the Colorado has been contentious, involving several cases that have gone up to the supreme court. As of march 2015 capturing rainwater was illegal in the state of Colorado. **The Water Knife** is clever for avoiding bringing up or explaining too much of the history of this region, where it would become bogged down and less accessible to someone like myself. Instead the author keeps the story moving ahead, truer to western pulp, couching it within plenty of gunfights and sex. In this book I felt he displayed less artistry than **The Windup Girl**. The gunslinger for hire, Angel, feels an almost generic badass-hero with a difficult and dark history. Scenes where Lucy a journalist and lead character is being intimidated and tortured, again feel so cliched to the genre that it makes sense when she needs almost no time to recover from what ought to be psychologically destructive. When Emiko, the windup girl was in danger or being abused there was time in the narrarative to me as a reader to grieve with/for her, to take a moment and think about her abuser. No such time is afforded here. The world is ending afterall. 

The author mentions Reisner's, "**Cadillac Desert**" both in passing and as a central plot point. According to wikipedia its supposed to be Reisners magnum opus about water and land usage in the west. I haven't read it...yet. Baciagalupi clearly wants me to. He isn't being subtle or coy about it, he wants all the readers of **The Water Knife** to look into **Cadillac Desert**. In the activism aspect **The Water Knife** is a lot more targeted, than say Dune. The society it portrays isnt stable or one I want any part of. There aren't any zen-middleeastern-desert tribes here; in sync with their environment patiently awaiting the messiah. There isn't a messiah, there is no hope, there is no return to the good days of present. 

There are of course a lot of places on the planet today where this harsh reality exists. Refugee numbers and mass migration events are occuring out of war-torn african countries into Europe. From the reporting I have read, the conditions in these refugee camps ranges from desperate to despicable. Like Maria, another one of the central characters in **The Water Knife**, there are a million children from Syria alone. The UN refugee agency states that the minimum daily requirement of water per person daily is 20 liters (5.3 gal) on its website. Thats a little under 3 plastic bottles of milk in the US. A sobering calculation that my 10 minute daily gym shower conservatively uses about 20 gallons of water. In 10 minutes I have used enough water for 4 days of survival. Baciagalupi despite the pulpiness of the story, succeeds in planting the seed of water conservancy in my head without being overtly preachy or condesceding. 

####   Recommended.